---
layout: unforgiving-void-dev-blog-post
title: "Origins"
categories: 
  - "unforgiving-void"
  - "dev"
date: 2020-09-01
---
If you are like me, you love science fiction and you particularly love epic space battles.  Star Wars, Star Trek, Battlestar Galactica, for most of my life, these defined for me what combat would be like in space.  I never really thought about the major issues with the way space battles were depicted, even though I have a physics degree.  Then I read the Expanse books and watched the series bring realistic space battles to life.  And I started to delve into all things hard sci fi, such as the excellent [atomic rockets site]{projectrho.com).  I can still enjoy the spectacle of swooping starships, pew pew lasers and giant explosions, but I long for a game with a more realistic expereince.

In my teenage years I played a computer game called Renegade Legion.  I understand it was a tabletop RPG with deep combat and damage systems, though I never played the tabletop version.  It was basically a turn based tactical ship combat in 2D.  You had to provision thrust to accelerate, decelerate and turn.  Impossibly high G turns would threaten to kill your pilot, destroy your ship, or both.  If you accelerated to catch up to an enemy, you had to decelerate to match speeds to engage them.  It was brilliant, all the more so because it delivered a fun and deep stategic experience within the laws of physics, for the most part.

When I thought about the game I wanted to create, it was that game.  But of course I was much more ambitious.  I wanted to do 3D.  I wanted to have strategic ship movements over vast distances and times.  And I wanted it to be based in hard science.  

And thus Unforgiving Void.  It is the game I have wanted to play for some time.  A game that will unlock the strategic potential of realistic space combat across our system as 2 corporations vie for dominance by expanding their wealth and their influence, and sometimes through simple piracy.  A strategic potential that harkens back to the old days of fighting sail, where creating favorable conditions for engagement were a key to victory.  In those days, the commander who could start the battle with the "weather gauge", i.e. to windward of his opponent, could dictate the timing of the battle and to a large extent its outcome.  In space combat it's all about relative velocity.  Sure you can accelerate like mad to bring battle to your opponent, but you have to match velocities unless you want to do a rapid flyby with time only for one or two attacks with torpedos, rail guns, or PDCs; though, that might be a legitimate tactic in some situations.  Once you get there you have to be able to execute.  At relative velocities potentially in the km/sec range, real time combat is out of the question.  Once within a light second (almost 300K km) the game will enter a turn based phase where players have meticulous control over ship thrusters and weapons systems to position, evade and ultimately disable or destroy the enemy.  The system will allow you to give commands and then move time forward and backward within a window as you work to uncover the best positioning to allow you to strike, taking into account that your opponent is doing the same and you can't see the final course of combatants until the turn ends.  Combat will be fast and deadly; often ships may not survive direct hits and an enemies torpedos and projectiles can still kill you after they are dead.  Expect heavy losses no matter what your skill.  Equally important will be the system level aaspect of the game (when opposing ships are more than 1 light second apart) which will be in real time.  More on that in a future post.

Ships won't neccessarily be the sleek, sexy fighters and capital ships from our popular science fiction.  They will be created by the player from modules that will first and foremost be functional.  I'm sure the player base will find innovative ways to cobble parts together into ships that may sometimes push the bounds of good taste.  The modules will have assigned functions and complex interactions.  Every projectile, torpedo, rail gun shot, or PDC shot will fly through space realistically and strike modules.  Damaged and disabled modules will have realistic effects on combat.

Of course there will be some liberties taken with physics in the vein of creating compelling gameplay.  Some of the major issues with space flight and combat may not be fully addressed, such as radiation from fusion drives and heat dissapation.

As far as tech, I'm building this in [the Godot Game Engine](godotengine.org).  I love the Godot engine.  I'm not completely sure that it can handle the game I want to build and I may end up in Unity, but I'll stick with Godot as long as I can.  

So there it is.  A very ambitious game for my first 3D game and first in Godot (besides the projects from the awesome GameDev.tv course, highly recommended).  Hopefully I'll get some help, becasue I suck at all things art, love working with teams, and think this could take a really long time by myself.  If nothing else, I'll keep a record of my journey with regular development blog posts.

See you out there.
